---
layout: post
title: "Inchoate Questions about Authentication and Human Visual Recognition"
date:   2019-02-05 12:00:00 -0800

---
Vision is known to account for a substantial proportion of neural activity in human brains. An article by Denise Grady titled ["The Vision Thing: Mainly in the Brain"](http://discovermagazine.com/1993/jun/thevisionthingma227) had this to say at the time:"Neurons devoted to visual processing number in the hundreds of millions and take up about 30 percent of the cortex, as compared with 8 percent for touch and just 3 percent for hearing."

In 1996, [MIT Professor Mriganka Sur commented](http://news.mit.edu/1996/visualprocessing) that "half of the human brain is devoted directly or indirectly to vision."

From a brief scan of online literature, this number doesn't appear to have been revised since. The computations, loosely defined, that human beings perform on visual data is staggering. No wonder it can be refreshing to close our eyes for 15 minutes even if we don't actually nap: we temporarily stop processing the voluminous visual data around us.

Tonight, I was thinking about a topic I occasionally return to: [authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authentication). This is the mechanism by which electronic devices can prove that they are, in fact, them, in digital contexts. More accurately, it is the mechanism by which things owned by humans can electronically share data which can then be used to authenticate the things as belonging to their owners (although the concept of *"proving"*, non-mathematically speaking, is occasionally a problematic way to think about this, let's use the mental construct for now). When we recognize someone we know, such as a friend or family member or coworker, there _must_ be some way that we authenticate with one another. It doesn't seem plausible that humans would have evolved to the point at which we find ourselves without natural selection having reduced entropy in an important aspect of social interaction: the proper categorization (and the reduced likelihood of miscategorization) of people we know. Reliable interpersonal recognition would be a fine contender and prerequisite for advanced societies.

## Authentication in Cryptography
In the context of computer science and cryptography, authentication is a protocol. To quote Bruce Schneier (p. 21, [Applied Cryptography](https://www.schneier.com/books/applied_cryptography/), a protocol is "a series of steps, involving two or more parties, designed to accomplish a task". In authentication, the task is to prove possession of a private key that only one party is supposed to have. For example, here's how authentication of a mobile device and a server works for establishing a trusted connection: the device attempts to connect with a website, owned by a company. The website owner transfers a digital certificate from its server to the mobile device. The device reads the digital certificate.

One of the pieces of information contained within this certificate is the public key of the server owned by the company; that is, the public key of the very same server that just sent the certificate. The device performs some computation to verify that the certificate is valid and does indeed belong to the sender, the server's owner. Then the device uses the server's public key to encrypt a session key, which will later be used to establish a temporary and secure connection between the device and the website (i.e., the website's server). This is important because, as you might know, a website is just a document, and the device wants to be able to access that document securely—hence the encryption of the session key in the public key of the website owner's server.

Because the server's public key corresponds to a specific private key that only one device on the planet should possess (i.e., that server), only that server is able to use it to decrypt the session key that was just sent to it from the device. If the correct private key is indeed used, then the session key will be successfully decrypted by the server, and the secure session can then be established between that server and the device, using this temporary session key.

Two things of note here: one, the session key will only work between that one device and that one server and only for a certain amount of time. Two, mathematically speaking, it is impossible for the server to successfully decrypt the session key without the correct private key. This same is true for any other server that could possibly intercept the encrypted session key while it is in transit between the device and the server. If the connection between the two is lost or time runs out, the process begins anew the next time the device attempts to connect to the server. This is a simplified version of how authentication with [digital certificates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_key_certificate) in combination with [public key infrastructure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_key_infrastructure) works, and you can [read about](https://sites.google.com/site/amitsciscozone/home/security/ssl-connection-setup) and [visualize this process](https://www.google.com/imghp?q=client+server+authentication+digital+certificate) online.

Thus, I return to vision. This concept of using something only you, mathematically speaking, are in possession of, and of using it to prove that you are you and that you are still you since the last time you needed to do that, and of doing so in timespans too small to notice, is very interesting. When we recognize that friend or family member or coworker, is something similar taking place between us? If so, how can we apply it to machine learning for use in device-to-device visual recognition in the future, for use, for example, in situations where internet connections are not possible and therefore authentication via cryptographic protocols cannot take place between two machines?

At some point I'll return to this topic and write more about it, as I have further thoughts and questions about a related matter: the computation of acknowledgement as a shortcut to recognition. That is, when others recognize our faces and their recognition produces a response in their body language, how does their acknowledgement of our presence register in our brains, and is that process used as a less "computationally expensive" way to detect those whom we know? My questions are inchoate, so I'll adjourn here for now.
