---
layout: post
title: "An Era of Personal Data-as-a-Service Awaits"
date:   2019-01-12 12:00:00 -0800

---

Imagine that a technology company figured out a way to make a lot of money from analyzing the carbon dioxide generated by living organisms, but that the company in question needed to use actual CO2 samples respired by actual persons, animals, and plants. People could sell their CO2 to this company; farmers could rent access to their farms' livestock and tree respiration data; and ordinary citizens with pets could be paid in proportion to the amount of fresh CO2 their pets generated. Imagine that this CO2 was so valuable that the company could make different software optimized for different purposes, but that for this fictional company's technology to continue to generate wealth for its business, it would need a continuous supply of CO2 data from an ever-growing number and variety of sources from all over the world. Now imagine that it was not only one company, but many, who could benefit from building such CO2 data-fueled tech. Imagine further still that there was a way to seamlessly remunerate all willing participants for their contributions to these companies' successes, creating a global market for CO2 data.

The analogy above is an imagination meant to demonstrate how valuable data is in machine learning applications, which must be trained on existing or real-time datasets employed for supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning algorithms. The resulting software is valuable and underpins, and will continue to underpin, many enterprise and consumer applications, making many companies a great deal of money in the form of software they subsequently sell.

How and when will societies, company business models, and individuals shift to accommodate the mindset that we need to build data-as-a-service infrastructures capable of compensating people and non-corporate entities for profit-creating data used by large institutions?

## From Corporate Data Mining to Personal Data-as-a-Service

In Ethem Alpaydin's book _Machine Learning_, there's a passage that introduces the term _data mining_ by using an analogy(p.14):

> The analogy is that a large volume of earth and raw material is extracted from the mine, which when processed leads to a small amount of very precious material. Similarly in data mining, a large volume of data is processed to construct a simple model with valuable use, such as having high predictive accuracy.

If companies train their machine learning models with your data (as some do today, likely under terms and agreements that make your data "theirs"), then it's fascinating to think about what it would take to get paid for it upfront, or in the form of free access to otherwise paid services, or on an ongoing basis as a function of the initial and/or future value of the data that is yours that they used. This is the "If my data is mine, then pay me for data mine-ing me" argument. For architectural, security, and other reasons, building out the infrastructure needed to automate and audit a global remuneration system would almost undoubtedly make use of distributed systems, decentralized technologies (especially with regards to identity), blockchain-based payment systems, and, appropriately, artificial intelligence software.

The following McKinsey quote, though used to articulate points in the context of distributed ledger systems in financial services, proves salient and prescient ([Higginson, Nadeau, and Rajgopal, 2019](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/blockchains-occam-problem)):

> An emerging perspective is that the application of blockchain can be most valuable when it democratizes data access, enables collaboration, and solves specific pain points. Certainly, it brings benefits where it shifts ownership from corporations to consumers [...]...our suspicion is that it will be these species of uses cases, rather than those in financial services, that will eventually demonstrate the most value."

One irony here (within the original context of the article quote) is that financial services technology applied to payments for the use of personal data may well still become one of blockchain technology's killer applications, though to the inclusion of consumers and data science companies (i.e., all companies, as eventually all companies will make use of machine learning technologies requiring context-relevant data) rather than making the financial services industry the exclusive beneficiary of such innovation. That is, the infrastructure for a more egalitarian and proportional distribution of financial outcomes grounded in machine learning data would create a broader set of beneficiaries, albeit at the cost of new business models and possibly financial structures too. If data-based technologies pave the way for multi-trillion dollar companies in the future, a global conversation about how to appropriately compensate individuals for their datatributions is all but inevitable.

In fact, this may be an unavoidable prerequisite to liberating the full and transformative power of artificial intelligence in the world, i.e., the activation energy that must be paid in order to launch humanity into its pre-Star Trek days. How else can we sustainably build a wave of well-trained next-generation machines and a data-driven global economic engine while also avoiding major human upheaval? The world is unlikely to support massive discrepancies in human outcomes without the fruits of prosperity being distributed in a credible, fair way that respects sovereignty and innovation while also protecting human dignity as we march towards a more machinized future. By the time we have sufficient technology in the world to have our first 2-trillion-dollar enterprise, enough wealth to make space tourism commonplace, and so many self-driving cars that autonomous driving becomes the norm rather than the exception, humanity should also have more than enough technology in place to be able to meet [global sustainable development goals](http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sustainable-development-goals.html) and see to its other human responsibilities.

On that note, one might add, what better way to fund [basic universal income](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_income) projects than to give humans the option to be paid for some of the data they produce every day? Elon Musk has stated that he thinks "some kind of universal income is going to be necessary" ([Davis, 2017](https://www.fastcompany.com/4030576/elon-musk-says-automation-will-make-a-universal-basic-income-necessary-soon)), and given his company Tesla's need for real-world data to train the existing and next-generation software used in Tesla's cars, perhaps Tesla and other leading companies in the machine learning space can fund efforts to build the backbone of such a data-for-income conduit. Once the technology is capable of making this possible, societies and consumers, if not also businesses, will begin to ask for it anyhow.

Exactly how to create such an infrastructure utilizing a combination of existing and upcoming database, self-sovereign identity, and other technologies is something that will be interesting to study and ponder further. As machine learning models get better and start to require more and more specialized training data, business-to-business (B2B), business-to-consumer (B2C), consumer-to-business (C2B), and consumer-to-consumer (C2C) relationships grounded in data-as-a-service models will become increasingly important to our future.
